# Tutorial

This tutorial for Trocq first explains how to use the plugin in general, then covers several examples of proof transfer cases.

## Use of the plugin

The Trocq plugin must be used in two steps:

1. First, the user fills in the knowledge base by declaring pairs of terms linked by a parametricity relation.  
These terms can be inductive types or any constants. Two terms `a : A` and `a' : A'` must be related by an instance of the relation `AR` linking their types `A` and `A'`, *i.e.*, an inhabitant of `AR a a'`. In the particular case of types, two types `A` and `B` must be related by an inhabitant of `ParamNK.Rel A B` with `(N, K)` the parametricity class describing the structure given to the relation between `A` and `B`, ranging from a raw relation to a full type equivalence.  
Declaring these relations can be done by filling every desired field of the `Param` record, but can be made easier by going through the definitions in `theories/Common.v`. Indeed, we offer to the user a way to generate `Param` records from functions (module `Fun`), split injections (module `SplitInj`), split surjections (module `SplitSurj`), or isomorphisms (module `Iso`), respectively yielding instances of `Param` at levels $(4, 0)$, $(4, 2_b)$, $(4, 2_a)$, and $(4, 4)$.

2. Second, the user states a goal to prove featuring terms that are left-hand components in the previously declared pairs, so that Trocq can perform proof transfer and rephrase the goal with the right-hand components, by combining the parametricity relations provided with the pairs of terms.

The first step is done with the `Trocq Use` command whose only argument is the parametricity relation. The second step is done by calling the `trocq` tactic after stating the goal to prove. The tactic then automatically proves the goal substitution with a generated transfer proof and only leaves the associated goal to prove.

## Examples

In this section, we show various use cases of Trocq related to arithmetic, containers, mathematics, and rewriting.

### Arithmetic

Trocq can be used to perform proof transfer in arithmetic goals, and thus enable proof reuse by allowing the use of standard library lemmas on user-defined custom arithmetic types.

#### Binary natural numbers (`peano_bin_nat.v`)

In this example, we define a binary version of natural numbers in the following way:
```coq
Inductive positive : Set :=
  | xI : positive -> positive
  | xO : positive -> positive
  | xH : positive.

Inductive N : Set :=
  | N0 : N
  | Npos : positive -> N.
```
We can show that there is an isomorphism between `N` and the standard library `nat` encoding for natural numbers in Peano style, by proving `Iso.type N nat`, *i.e.*, by inhabiting the following types:
```coq
N_to_nat : N -> nat
nat_to_N : nat -> N
N_to_natK : forall n, nat_to_N (N_to_nat n) = n
nat_to_NK : forann n, N_to_nat (nat_to_N n) = n
```
By using `Iso.toParam`, we can prove `RN44 : Param44.Rel N nat`, which is a parametricity relation between both types, and as such, can be added to Trocq with the following command:
```coq
Trocq Use RN44.
```

Now, suppose we want to prove the following lemma about binary natural numbers (the successor-based induction principle):
```coq
Lemma N_Srec : forall (P : N -> Type), P N0 -> (forall n, P n -> P n.+1%N) -> forall n, P n.
```
We can see `N0` and a binary successor operation `.+1%N` appear in the goal. We must therefore add them to Trocq as well before running the tactic. As they are not type formers, the parametricity proofs expected to relate `N0` to `O` and `.+1%N` to `S` are instances of the relation given in `RN44` relating natural numbers in both encodings:
```coq
RN0 : RN 0%N 0%nat
RNS : forall m n, RN m n -> RN m.+1%N n.+1%nat
```
Once these proofs are defined, we can add them to Trocq with the following commands:
```coq
Trocq Use RN0.
Trocq Use RNS.
```
Now, everything has been declared and we are ready to call `trocq` on the goal, to obtain the following associated goal:
```coq
forall (P : nat -> PType map1 map1), P O -> (forall n, P n -> P (S n)) -> forall n, P n
```
Let us explain quickly the `PType map1 map1`. According to dependency propagation in the Trocq inference rules, the occurrence of `Type` in the original goal had to be related to itself at level $(2_a, 0)$ in the hierarchy, *i.e.* by a term of type `Param2a0.Rel Type Type`, which can be proved by giving structure $(2_a, 0)$ to any relation of the hierarchy. Because of all the occurrences of `P` in the goal, this initially arbitrary relation was constrained to be at least `Param11.Rel`, which explains the displayed class in the output goal. Please note that `PType map1 map1` is convertible to `Type`, this is just present to inform the user about what was required during the proof.

We can conclude this proof by noticing the goal is now exactly the induction principle generated by Coq on the `nat` type, and calling `exact nat_rect`.

The `peano_bin_nat.v` file contains this example but remarks that the isomorphism-based `RN44` was not strictly necessary, and a relation at level $(2_a, 3)$ was sufficient to perform this proof transfer.

#### Modular arithmetic (`int_to_Zp.v`)

todo

<!-- ```coq
Lemma Radd : forall (x : Zp) (x' : int) (xR : Rp x x') (y : Zp) (y' : int) (yR : Rp y y'), Rp (x + y)%Zp (x' + y')%int.
Proof. (...) Qed.

Trocq Use Radd.
```
will enable the translation of the addition over type Zp (integers mod p) to type int (integers) because Rp is defined as the embedding of an integer mod p into int via a suitable `pmap` function:

```coq
Definition Rp (x : Zp) (n : int) := pmap x = n.
```

As soon as Rp is equipped with the suitable structure (which is not an equivalence in this case!), we can use it to transfer to Zp the obvious consequences of the arithemtic on integers. For instance:
```coq
Goal (forall x y, x + y = y + x)%Zp.
Proof.
trocq. (* here we obtain the corresponding goal type int *)
apply int_add_comm. (* here we use the commutativity of addition on  type int *)
Qed.
``` -->

#### Bitwise arithmetic (`Vector_tuple.v`)

todo

### Containers

todo

### Lifting equivalences to lists

`list nat` `list binnat`
todo

### Vectors and iterated tuples (`Vector_tuple.v`)

todo

<!-- ```coq
Lemma head_const {n : nat} : forall (i : int), Vector.hd (Vector.const i (S n)) = i.
Proof. destruct n; simpl; reflexivity. Qed.
```
states that the head of a vector filled with `(n + 1)` copies of any `(i : int)` is equal to `i`, for vectors as the type `Vector.t` from Coq's standard library. The `trocq` tactic transfers it to its analogue on the head of a tuple filled with `(n + 1)` copies of any `(z : Zp)`, with type `tuple` being defined as a fixpoint-generated iterated product and `Zp` a type for integers modulo p:
```coq
Lemma head_const' : forall {n : nat} (z : Zp), head (const z (S n)) = z.
Proof. trocq. apply @head_const. Qed.
```
The database used by the `trocq` tactic  has proofs that `vector A` and `tuple A'` are (4-4)-related (i.e, equivalent) when `A` and `A'` are related and that Zp and int are (4, 2b)-related (as well as the corollaries on weaker relations), plus proofs that the respective `head`, `const` and successor operations on these types are related.

Types `Vector.t` and `tuple` play here the role of a pair of arbitrary equivalent polymorphic data structures, and `Zp` that of a refinement of `int`. -->

### Mathematics

infinite summation
todo

### Rewriting

setoid / gen rewriting
todo